PubMed ID: 38040624 
Title: SNAREs: a double-edged sword for intravacuolar bacterial pathogens within host cells. 
DOI: 10.1016/j.tim.2023.11.002 
Abstract: In the tug-of-war between host and pathogen, both evolve to combat each other's defence arsenals. Intracellular phagosomal bacteria have developed strategies to modify the vacuolar niche to suit their requirements best. Conversely, the host tries to target the pathogen-containing vacuoles towards the degradative pathways. The host cells use a robust system through intracellular trafficking to maintain homeostasis inside the cellular milieu. In parallel, intracellular bacterial pathogens have coevolved with the host to harbour strategies to manipulate cellular pathways, organelles, and cargoes, facilitating the conversion of the phagosome into a modified pathogen-containing vacuole (PCV). Key molecular regulators of intracellular traffic, such as changes in the organelle (phospholipid) composition, recruitment of small GTPases and associated effectors, soluble N-ethylmaleimide-sensitive factor-activating protein receptors (SNAREs), etc., are hijacked to evade lysosomal degradation. Legionella, Salmonella, Coxiella, Chlamydia, Mycobacterium, and Brucella are examples of pathogens which diverge from the endocytic pathway by using effector-mediated mechanisms to overcome the challenges and establish their intracellular niches. These pathogens extensively utilise and modulate the end processes of secretory pathways, particularly SNAREs, in repurposing the PCV into specialised compartments resembling the host organelles within the secretory network; at the same time, they avoid being degraded by the host's cellular mechanisms. Here, we discuss the recent research advances on the host-pathogen interaction/crosstalk that involves host SNAREs, conserved cellular processes, and the ongoing host-pathogen defence mechanisms in the molecular arms race against each other. The current knowledge of SNAREs, and intravacuolar bacterial pathogen interactions, enables us to understand host cellular innate immune pathways, maintenance of homeostasis, and potential therapeutic strategies to combat ever-growing antimicrobial resistance. 

