PubMed ID: 38056114 
Title: Serological assays for differentiating natural COVID-19 infection from vaccine induced immunity. 
DOI: 10.1016/j.jcv.2023.105621 
Abstract: Natural SARS-CoV-2 infection may elicit antibodies to a range of viral proteins including non-structural protein ORF8. RNA, adenovirus vectored and sub-unit vaccines expressing SARS-CoV-2 spike would be only expected to elicit S-antibodies and antibodies to distinct domains of nucleocapsid (N) protein may reliably differentiate infection from vaccine-elicited antibody. However, inactivated whole virus vaccines may potentially elicit antibody to wider range of viral proteins, including N protein. We hypothesized that antibody to ORF8 protein will discriminate natural infection from vaccination irrespective of vaccine type. We optimized and validated the anti-ORF8 and anti-N C-terminal domain (NCTD) ELISA assays using sera from pre-pandemic, RT-PCR confirmed natural infection sera and BNT162b2 (BNT) or CoronaVac vaccinees. We then applied these optimized assays to a cohort of blood donor sera collected in April-July 2022 with known vaccination and self-reported infection status. We optimized cut-off values for the anti-ORF8 and anti-N-CTD IgG ELISA assays using receiver-operating-characteristic (ROC) curves. The sensitivity of the anti-ORF8 and anti-N-CTD ELISA for detecting past infection was 83.2% and 99.3%, respectively. Specificity of anti-ORF8 ELISA was 96.8 % vs. the pre-pandemic cohort or 93% considering the pre-pandemic and vaccine cohorts together. The anti-N-CTD ELISA specificity of 98.9% in the pre-pandemic cohort, 93% in BNT vaccinated and only 4 % in CoronaVac vaccinated cohorts. Anti-N-CTD antibody was longer-lived than anti-ORF8 antibody after natural infection. Anti-N-CTD antibody assays provide good discrimination between natural infection and vaccination in BNT162b2 vaccinated individuals. Anti-ORF8 antibody can help discriminate infection from vaccination in either type of vaccine and help estimate infection attack rates (IAR) in communities. 

