PubMed ID: 38061560 
Title: Toxicity of tigecycline on the freshwater microalga Scenedesmus obliquus: Photosynthetic and transcriptional responses. 
DOI: 10.1016/j.chemosphere.2023.140885 
Abstract: Tigecycline (TGC) is a new tetracycline antibiotic medication against multidrug-resistant bacteria. However, the toxicity of TGC to microalgae remains largely unknown. In this study, the toxicity of TGC on Scenedesmus obliquus was examined, focusing on changes in algal growth, photosynthetic activity, and transcriptome. According to an acute toxicity test, the IC10 and IC50 values were 0.72 mg/L and 4.15 mg/L, respectively. Analyses of photosynthetic efficiency and related parameters, such as light absorption, energy capture, and electron transport, identified a 35% perturbation in the IC50 group, while the IC10 group remained largely unaffected. Transcriptomic analysis showed that in the IC10 and IC50 treatment groups, there were 874 differentially expressed genes (DEGs) (220 upregulated and 654 downregulated) and 4289 DEGs (2660 upregulated and 1629 downregulated), respectively. Gene Ontology enrichment analysis showed that TGC treatment markedly affected photosynthesis, electron transport, and chloroplast functions. In the IC50 group, a clear upregulation of genes related to photosynthesis and chloroplast functions was observed, which could be an adaptive stress response. In the IC10 group, significant downregulation of DEGs involved in ribosomal pathways and peptide biosynthesis processes was observed. Kyoto Encyclopedia of Gene and Genomes enrichment analysis showed that treatment with TGC also disrupted energy production, protein synthesis, and metabolic processes in S. obliquus. Significant downregulation of key proteins related to Photosystem II was observed under the IC10 TGC treatment. Conversely, IC50 TGC treatment resulted in substantial upregulation across a broad array of photosystem-related proteins from both Photosystems II and I. IC10 and IC50 TGC treatments differentially influenced proteins involved in the photosynthetic electron transport process. This study emphasizes the potential risks of TGC pollution to microalgae, which contributes to a better understanding of the effects of antibiotic contamination in aquatic ecosystems. 

