PubMed ID: 38053038 
Title: High genomic plasticity and unique features of Xanthomonas translucens pv. graminis revealed through comparative analysis of complete genome sequences. 
DOI: 10.1186/s12864-023-09855-8 
Abstract: Xanthomonas translucens pv. graminis (Xtg) is a major bacterial pathogen of economically important forage grasses, causing severe yield losses. So far, genomic resources for this pathovar consisted mostly of draft genome sequences, and only one complete genome sequence was available, preventing comprehensive comparative genomic analyses. Such comparative analyses are essential in understanding the mechanisms involved in the virulence of pathogens and to identify virulence factors involved in pathogenicity. In this study, we produced high-quality, complete genome sequences of four strains of Xtg, complementing the recently obtained complete genome sequence of the Xtg pathotype strain. These genomic resources allowed for a comprehensive comparative analysis, which revealed a high genomic plasticity with many chromosomal rearrangements, although the strains were highly related. A high number of transposases were exclusively found in Xtg and corresponded to 413 to 457 insertion/excision transposable elements per strain. These mobile genetic elements are likely to be involved in the observed genomic plasticity and may play an important role in the adaptation of Xtg. The pathovar was found to lack a type IV secretion system, and it possessed the smallest set of type III effectors in the species. However, three XopE and XopX family effectors were found, while in the other pathovars of the species two or less were present. Additional genes that were specific to the pathovar were identified, including a unique set of minor pilins of the type IV pilus, 17 TonB-dependent receptors (TBDRs), and 11 plant cell wall degradative enzymes. These results suggest a high adaptability of Xtg, conferred by the abundance of mobile genetic elements, which could play a crucial role in pathogen adaptation. The large amount of such elements in Xtg compared to other pathovars of the species could, at least partially, explain its high virulence and broad host range. Conserved features that were specific to Xtg were identified, and further investigation will help to determine genes that are essential to pathogenicity and host adaptation of Xtg. 

