PubMed ID: 38060615 
Title: Deep analysis of CD4 T cells in the rhesus CNS during SIV infection. 
DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1011844 
Abstract: Virologic suppression with antiretroviral therapy (ART) has significantly improved health outcomes for people living with HIV, yet challenges related to chronic inflammation in the central nervous system (CNS)-known as Neuro-HIV- persist. As primary targets for HIV-1 with the ability to survey and populate the CNS and interact with myeloid cells to co-ordinate neuroinflammation, CD4 T cells are pivotal in Neuro-HIV. Despite their importance, our understanding of CD4 T cell distribution in virus-targeted CNS tissues, their response to infection, and potential recovery following initiation of ART remain limited. To address these gaps, we studied ten SIVmac251-infected rhesus macaques using an ART regimen simulating suboptimal adherence. We evaluated four macaques during the acute phase pre-ART and six during the chronic phase. Our data revealed that HIV target CCR5+ CD4 T cells inhabit both the brain parenchyma and adjacent CNS tissues, encompassing choroid plexus stroma, dura mater, and the skull bone marrow. Aligning with the known susceptibility of CCR5+ CD4 T cells to viral infection and their presence within the CNS, high levels of viral RNA were detected in the brain parenchyma and its border tissues during acute SIV infection. Single-cell RNA sequencing of CD45+ cells from the brain revealed colocalization of viral transcripts within CD4 clusters and significant activation of antiviral molecules and specific effector programs within T cells, indicating CNS CD4 T cell engagement during infection. Acute infection led to marked imbalance in the CNS CD4/CD8 ratio which persisted into the chronic phase. These observations underscore the functional involvement of CD4 T cells within the CNS during SIV infection, enhancing our understanding of their role in establishing CNS viral presence. Our findings offer insights for potential T cell-focused interventions while underscoring the challenges in eradicating HIV from the CNS, particularly in the context of sub-optimal ART. 

