PubMed ID: 38049261 
Title: Combined treatment of pulsed light and nisin-organic acid based antimicrobial wash for inactivation of Escherichia coli O157:H7 in Romaine lettuce, reduction of microbial loads, and retention of quality. 
DOI: 10.1016/j.fm.2023.104402 
Abstract: Microbial safety of fresh produce continues to be a major concern. Novel antimicrobial methods are needed to minimize the risk of contamination. This study investigated the antimicrobial efficacy of pulsed light (PL), a novel nisin-organic acid based antimicrobial wash (AW) and the synergy thereof in inactivating E. coli O157:H7 on Romaine lettuce. Treatment effects on background microbiota and produce quality during storage at 4 °C for 7 days was also investigated. A bacterial cocktail containing three outbreak strains of E. coli O157:H7 was used as inoculum. Lettuce leaves were spot inoculated on the surface before treating with PL (1-60 s), AW (2 min) or combinations of PL with AW. PL treatment for 10 s, equivalent to fluence dose of 10.5 J/cm2, was optimal and resulted in 2.3 log CFU/g reduction of E. coli O157:H7, while a 2 min AW treatment, provided a comparable pathogen reduction of 2.2 log CFU/g. Two possible treatment sequences of PL and AW combinations were investigated. For PL-AW combination, inoculated lettuce leaves were initially exposed to optimum PL dose followed by 2 min AW treatment, whereas for AW-PL combination, inoculated lettuce were subjected to 2 min AW treatment prior to 10 s PL treatment. Both combination treatments (PL-AW and AW-PL) resulted in synergistic inactivation as E. coli cells were not detectable after treatment, indicating >5 log pathogen reductions. Combination treatments significantly (P < 0.05) reduced spoilage microbial populations on Romaine lettuce and also hindered their growth in storage for 7 days. The firmness and visual quality appearance of lettuce were not significantly (P > 0.05) influenced due to combination treatments. Overall, the results reveal that PL and AW combination treatments can be implemented as a novel approach to enhance microbial safety, quality and shelf life of Romaine lettuce. 

